Add a KEP for DNS Autopath in pod API (#967)
kubernetes/enhancements: keps/sig-network/2009-dns-autopath/README.md

The search path currently includes: 

1. "$NS.svc.$SUFFIX"
2. "svc.$SUFFIX"
3. "$SUFFIX"
4. Host level suffixes, which might be 2 or 3 in number.

Where $NS stands for the namespace that the pod belongs to, $SUFFIX is the Kubernetes cluster suffix.

These search paths are set to make sure: 

 1. Pods can discover Services in the same namespace using just the service name.
 2. Pods can discover Services across namespaces using shorthand of the form "$SVCNAME.$NSNAME"
 3. Pods can discover resources within the same cluster.

These searchpaths are included in pods' /etc/resolv.conf by kubelet and are enforced by setting ndots to 5. This means any hostname lookups with fewer than 5 dots will be expanded using all the search paths listed.

> When pod issues a query to lookup hostname "service123", it is expanded to 6 queries - one for the original hostname and one with each of the searchpaths appended. Some resolvers issue both A and AAAA queries, so this can be a total of 12 or more queries for every single DNS lookup. When these queries are issued in parallel, they end up at the node with the same source tuple and need to be DNAT'ed increasing the chance of a [netfilter race condition](https://www.weave.works/blog/racy-conntrack-and-dns-lookup-timeouts).

Author: > If "service123" matches a service name in the client's namespace, then it is only expanded to 1 query (2 for dual stack).
I assume this is the case if the searchpath-expanded queries are sent one by one? If they all go out in parallel, the client will wait for all to return, even if one of them got a valid response?

> When pod issues a query to lookup hostname "service123", it is expanded to 6 queries - one for the original hostname and one with each of the searchpaths appended. Some resolvers issue both A and AAAA queries, so this can be a total of 12 or more queries for every single DNS lookup. When these queries are issued in parallel, they end up at the node with the same source tuple and need to be DNAT'ed increasing the chance of a [netfilter race condition](https://www.weave.works/blog/racy-conntrack-and-dns-lookup-timeouts).

Reviewer: >  If they all go out in parallel, the client will wait for all to return, even if one of them got a valid response?

Are there clients that implement searching all domains in the list in parallel?  I have only seen sequential (with A and AAAA in parallel at each domain path).

> When pod issues a query to lookup hostname "service123", it is expanded to 6 queries - one for the original hostname and one with each of the searchpaths appended. Some resolvers issue both A and AAAA queries, so this can be a total of 12 or more queries for every single DNS lookup. When these queries are issued in parallel, they end up at the node with the same source tuple and need to be DNAT'ed increasing the chance of a [netfilter race condition](https://www.weave.works/blog/racy-conntrack-and-dns-lookup-timeouts).

Author: I think you're right.. I looked at the pcap from an alpine client just now. Looks like A and AAAA reuse the same port and get sent at the same time. Each searchpath expanded query is being sent sequentially. Also, searchpath expansion does terminate once a valid response is received. Thanks for pointing this out, i will update this section. Really useful to see the 3 cases worst affected by this behavior.

> When pod issues a query to lookup hostname "service123", it is expanded to 6 queries - one for the original hostname and one with each of the searchpaths appended. Some resolvers issue both A and AAAA queries, so this can be a total of 12 or more queries for every single DNS lookup. When these queries are issued in parallel, they end up at the node with the same source tuple and need to be DNAT'ed increasing the chance of a [netfilter race condition](https://www.weave.works/blog/racy-conntrack-and-dns-lookup-timeouts).

Reviewer 2: TIL, seems that parallelize the nameserver`s queries, not the searc domains
> Traditional resolvers, including glibc’s, make use of multiple nameserver lines in resolv.conf by trying each one in sequence and falling to the next after one times out. musl’s resolver queries them all in parallel and accepts whichever response arrives first.
https://andydote.co.uk/2019/12/30/consul-alpine-dns-revisited/

> If one of the several queries fails, the DNS lookup on the client side will fail after a 5s timeout. This issue is most-applicable to A/AAAA lookups which form the bulk of DNS lookups. PTR Records are not subject to searchpath expansion(since they always have >5 dots).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If a response is not received for one of the queries, the DNS lookup on the client side will fail after a 5s timeout. This issue is most-applicable to A/AAAA lookups which form the bulk of DNS lookups. PTR Records are not subject to searchpath expansion(since they always have >5 dots).
```

### Goals

* Provide a solution to minimize number of DNS queries on the client side, for a DNS lookup. 
This solution will preserve the current behavior that allows shortname lookups of Kubernetes resources.

* Make this solution configurable via the k8s API.

### Non-Goals
Modifying the current Kubernetes DNS Schema is not a goal of this KEP.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces use of a single searchpath by client pods when performing a DNS lookup. This searchpath will contain all the information needed to figure out the list of searchpaths to apply for that DNS lookup. 

As observed from the list of searchpaths in the current DNS schema, the searchpaths used for each pod is the same, except for the namespace. If this information can be included in a single searchpath, some entity that is aware of the DNS schema can expand this to a list of searchpaths. This entity could be the ClusterDNS server(CoreDNS), NodeLocal DNSCache or a sidecar container running in the client pod.
 
The new searchpath is of the form: 

> `search.$NS.$SUFFIX.ap.k8s.io`, where $NS is the namespace of the pod and $SUFFIX is the cluster suffix. ap.k8s.io is the delimiter to identify if a query needs search expansion.

Reviewer 3: Problem:  any DNS processor who ISN'T aware of this magic might route the query to the real k8s.io zone servers. That's an info leak, at best and more likely it's a CVE.

I think you would have to preserve the suffix, so maybe `$NS.autopath.$SUFFIX` instead?  That should route to the cluster zone and not leak out into the world.  "autopath" could be "ap" or "search" or "srch" or so something.

This searchpath can be set by using `dnsPolicy:None` to start with, as described [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/#pod-dns-config).

> Once this feature graduates to GA, the default searchpath for `ClusterFirst` and `ClusterFirstWithHostNet` will include this new searchpath instead of the 3 different k8s specific searchpaths.

Reviewer 3: I am not sure how we can do that - we need to know that the cluster's DNS resolver supports it (either query parsing or or EDNS0) so it seems like it has to be opt-in basically forever.  It might be possible to change the default behavior on a cluster-by-cluster basis but not globally.

With this new searchpath, when a clientPod in the "default" namespace looks up a service - "mytestsvc”:

1) The query will be sent out as `mytestsvc.search.default.cluster.local.ap.k8s.io`. 

> 2) clusterDNS server(coreDNS by default) receives this and strips off the delimiter - "ap.k8s.io" and identifies "search" as start of the custom searchpath. The namespace and cluster suffix can be obtained from rest of the string. The DNS server can now construct the full service name for this query as - `mytestsvc.default.svc.cluster.local`. 

Reviewer: Despite the fact that the `pod` subdomain was recently removed from the DNS Spec, I don't think we should always assume the type of the query is `svc` ... IOW the original query should contain that information... e.g. `mytestsvc.search.svc.default.cluster.local.ap.k8s.io`

Author: good point.. looks like it should be part of the custom searchpath suffix then.

This approach minimizes the number of DNS queries at client side to atmost 2(A, AAAA). The searchpath expansion logic moves to the server side.

However, the above approach requires the clusterDNS server to know about the k8s DNS schema as well as the syntax of this custom searchpath. It does know about k8s DNS schema anyway, but knowledge of the custom searchpath is an additional requirement.

### New EDNS0 Option

As an alternative, we introduce an EDNS0 option which will include a list of
searchpaths to be applied to the base query. 

A new EDNS0 option - SearchPaths is introduced, with an option code from the [experimental range - 65001 to 65534](https://www.iana.org/assignments/dns-parameters/dns-parameters.xhtml#dns-parameters-11).
The value of this option will be a comma-separated string consisting of all the searchpaths which are to be appended to the main query and looked up. This option can be useful outside of Kubernetes as well.

> Instead of having to modify all client pod images to insert an EDNS0 option in their requests, a new CoreDNS plugin "gensearchpaths" will be introduced. This will generate a list of search paths as an EDNS0 option to a given query.

Reviewer: To construct the first search domain in the search path, the "gensearchpaths" plugin would need to know what namespace the client Pod sits in.  AFAIK, the only way to learn this is to maintain a map of IP->Pod by watching the Pod API, which does not scale well.

Author: The "gensearchpaths" plugin will identify the start and end of the custom searchpath - starts with "search" and ends with "ap.k8s.io". It is aware that the string in between is of the form <namespace>.<cluster suffix> and hence infers the namespace. Wouldn't this work?

Reviewer: Ah OK, I didn't understand that.  Please disregard my other comments. Thanks!

> This plugin can be used by [Nodelocal DNSCache](https://github.com/kubernetes/enhancements/blob/master/keps/sig-network/0030-nodelocal-dns-cache.md), which is a daemonset running a per-node DNS Cache. It can also be used by a sidecar container attached to a pod, to selectively use this feature. The sidecar container will run a stripped-down version of CoreDNS with the above plugin.

Reviewer: I think even as a sidecar, it's not straight forward to know the namespace of the enclosing pod.  There is [this post](https://stackoverflow.com/questions/46046110/how-to-get-the-current-namespace-in-a-pod), that suggests looking in `/var/run/secrets/kubernetes.io/serviceaccount/namespace`, but this seem kludgy to me.
Perhaps when the sidecar is created, an environment variable could be set.

Author: The sidecar will basically be a CoreDNS instance running "gensearchpaths" plugin. It will use the output from that to populate the new EDNS0 option. So, this sidecar determines the namespace by parsing the searchpath in /etc/resolv.conf which will be set to "search.<namespace>.<cluster suffix>.ap.k8s.io".

Good catch about determining namespace from a sidecar, i thought this was exposed in an env var already. In this case though, I think we can get awat with the limitation.

The clusterDNS service needs to support this new EDNS0 option and lookup multiple query names by expanding a single incoming query. This was tried on a test setup by [modifying the autopath plugin](https://github.com/coredns/coredns/compare/master...prameshj:auto) in CoreDNS to extract the searchpath from an EDNS0 option, for a proof of concept.

> If upstream ClusterDNS uses something other than CoreDNS, support for this EDNS0 option should be added for autopath to work. 

Reviewer 3: s/should/must

### Risks and Mitigations

> 1) If NodeLocal DNSCache is responsible for adding the EDNS0 option, DNS resolution can break if NodeLocal DNSCache is down or if the pods configured with the special searchpath point to the kube-dns service directly to resolve query names. This is because without the EDNS0 option, the custom searchpath is not resolvable by kube-dns/CoreDNS. Running 2 DNSCache instances would be necessary to keep searchpath expansion working during upgrades.

Reviewer 3: This is a significant limitation, IMO, and could make it infeasible to rely on the proxy.

4) A service name FQDN "mytestservice.default.svc.cluster.local" is looked up, ndots is set to 4.
No searchpath expansion, query hits the 2nd block "cluster.local" and is forwarded to kube-dns service. 
5) Queries matching a custom stubDomain will match their own config block and not be subject to this searchpath expansion.

There are 3 parts to the implementation:

1) Add a new CoreDNS plugin to generate searchpaths and attach EDNS0 option to a query. 

2) Enhance autopath plugin to read searchpaths from this new EDNS0 option. 

3) Enhance autopath to also parse the new searchpath format - `search.$NS.$SUFFIX.ap.k8s.io`. Doing this ensures that DNS resolution works even if user does not have a sidecar or node-local-dns pod running.

### Test Plan

The existing DNS conformance tests will be run against clusters with pods using the new "clusterFirstWithAutopath" dnsPolicy.

## Graduation Criteria

In order to graduate to beta, we will need:

Conformance tests exercising this new searchpath.

> Verify performance/scalability via automated testing and measure the improvement over the existing `clusterFirst` mode.

Reviewer 4: In some user cases, we want to enable `autopath` in our clusters, however, we still want a benchmark to compare with `enable autopath` and `disable autopath` to make sure that there is no performance decrease after we enable it.

This solution will preserve the current behavior that allows shortname lookups of Kubernetes resources.

* Make this solution configurable via the k8s API.

### Non-Goals
Modifying the current Kubernetes DNS Schema is not a goal of this KEP.

## Proposal

This proposal introduces use of a single searchpath by client pods when performing a DNS lookup. This searchpath will contain all the information needed to figure out the list of searchpaths to apply for that DNS lookup. 

As observed from the list of searchpaths in the current DNS schema, the searchpaths used for each pod is the same, except for the namespace. If this information can be included in a single searchpath, some entity that is aware of the DNS schema can expand this to a list of searchpaths. This entity could be the ClusterDNS server(CoreDNS), NodeLocal DNSCache or a sidecar container running in the client pod.
 
The new searchpath is of the form: 
`search.$NS.$SUFFIX.ap.k8s.io`, where $NS is the namespace of the pod and $SUFFIX is the cluster suffix. ap.k8s.io is the delimiter to identify if a query needs search expansion.

> This searchpath can be set by using `dnsPolicy:None` to start with, as described [here](https://kubernetes.io/docs/concepts/services-networking/dns-pod-service/#pod-dns-config). A new dnsPolicy "clusterFirstWithAutopath" could be introduced in the future.

Reviewer 5: Is this a temporarly thing to test the proposal or is setting `dnsPolicy: None` part of the proposal recommendation? We should make this clear. (Seems like the proposal would be to add a DnsPolicy)

We should think about whether or not adding a new dnsPolicy is necessary. Is the current way it expands necessary? Can we replace w/out needing a Pod level config change.

Author: In Alpha phase, the proposal is to use `dnsPolicy:None`, without having to make any API changes. 
I was thinking that a new dnsPolicy will help reduce friction in enabling the feature - only need to make one config change. Good point that we would replace the ClusterFirst implementation once this has gotten sufficient testing/real-world usage.

At GA or soon after, the default searchpath for `ClusterFirst` and `ClusterFirstWithHostNet` could include this new searchpath instead of the 3 different k8s specific searchpaths. That would require CoreDNS to include the autopath plugin(which can parse this custom name) in the default configuration. Updated KEP to reflect this.

When a clientPod in the "default" namespace looks up a service - "mytestsvc”:

> 1) The query will be sent out as `mytestsvc.search.default.cluster.local.ap.k8s.io`. 

Reviewer 5: Is this a potential DNS amplification attack vector? (or no?)

Author: a rogue pod can achieve more amplification by using the current set of searchpaths today by running using Alpine base image and using web apps that do searchpath expansion.

2) clusterDNS server(coreDNS by default) receives this and strips off the delimiter - "ap.k8s.io" and identifies "search" as start of the custom searchpath. The namespace and cluster suffix can be obtained from rest of the string. The DNS server can now construct the full service name for this query as - `mytestsvc.default.svc.cluster.local`. 

This approach minimizes the number of DNS queries at client side to atmost 2(A, AAAA). The searchpath expansion logic moves to the server side.

However, the above approach requires the clusterDNS server to know about the k8s DNS schema as well as the syntax of this custom searchpath. It does know about k8s DNS schema anyway, but knowledge of the custom searchpath is an additional requirement.

> As an alternative, we introduce an EDNS0 option which will include a list of

Reviewer 5: (minor) can we make the two alternatives clear from the formatting (use the ### section marker)

3) Client pod looks up "google.com" with searchpath expansion. Query is received as `google.com.search.default.cluster.local.ap.k8s.io`. The searchpath expanded queries have no response, so "google.com" fallthrough to external DNS Server without EDNS0 option.

4) A service name FQDN "mytestservice.default.svc.cluster.local" is looked up, ndots is set to 4.
No searchpath expansion, query hits the 2nd block "cluster.local" and is forwarded to kube-dns service. 
5) Queries matching a custom stubDomain will match their own config block and not be subject to this searchpath expansion.

There are 3 parts to the implementation:

1) Add a new CoreDNS plugin to generate searchpaths and attach EDNS0 option to a query. 

2) Enhance autopath plugin to read searchpaths from this new EDNS0 option. 

3) Enhance autopath to also parse the new searchpath format - `search.$NS.$SUFFIX.ap.k8s.io`. Doing this ensures that DNS resolution works even if user does not have a sidecar or node-local-dns pod running.

### Test Plan

The existing DNS conformance tests will be run against clusters with pods using the new "clusterFirstWithAutopath" dnsPolicy.

> 

Reviewer 6: `Graduation Criteria` section is missing!

## Implementation History

* <TBD> - Implementable version merged
* 2019-04-15 - Initial discussion around this KEP
 
## Alternatives

* Use current autopath plugin in CoreDNS and set a single searchpath in podSpec. This approach requires watching all pods to map the pod namespace and ip address of the pod. The namespace of the pod can be determined from the source ip in the DNS request, as a result of this mapping. This additional watch can be resource intensive and also is a solution specific to CoreDNS.
*
* Introduce a new dnsPolicy `clusterFirstWithAutopath` that sets this custom searchpath automatically.

* An optimization in the EDNS0 option could be to include a version number and metadata and move the logic of determining searchpaths to the server side. The benefit of this approach is that the size overhead of the EDNS0 option is minimal. But, it requires the server to have logic to compute searchpaths in addition to performing the expanded queries. Also, that makes the EDNS0 option kubernetes-specific.

> 

Reviewer 5: extra whitespace
